# XML

## what is XML?

* XML stands for E**X**tensible **M**arkup **L**anguage

> It defines a set of **rules** for encoding documents in a format that is **both human-readable and machine-readable**.

source: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML)


## Rules

### tags ...

* this is an (opening) tag: `<someName>`
* this is a closing tag: `</someName>`
* this is a tag: `<someName>some content</someName>`
* this is an empty tag: `<someName/>`

### ... and attributes

* attributes only live **inside opening tags**
* this is an attribute with a value: `<someName attribute="value">`

#### names of tags and attributes

* can be named arbitrarily, just avoid any special characters see [Rules for Naming Tags and Attributes](#rules-for-naming-tags-and-attributes)

> [!TIP]
> Your XML-Editor should know the rules and inform you in case of any violation

### start and end tag

```xml
<tag>text</tag>
```

### Respect the hierarchy / no overlapping mark up
```xml
<parent>
    <child></child>
</parent>
```

```xml
<parent>
    <child></parent>
</child>
```

### avoid or encode special characters

#### always
* `<` should be written as `&lt;`
* `>` should be written as `&gt;`
* `&` should be written as `&amp;`

#### in attributes
* `'` should be written as `&apos;`
* `"` should be written as `&quot;`

----

## Rules for Naming Tags and Attributes

(generated by GitHub-Copilot using GPT 4o)

1. Start with a letter or underscore: Names must start with a letter (a-z or A-Z) or an underscore (_).
1.  They cannot start with a number or punctuation character.
1. Follow with letters, digits, hyphens, underscores, and periods: After the initial character, names can include letters, digits (0-9), hyphens (-), underscores (_), and periods (.).
1. No spaces: Names cannot contain spaces.
1. Case-sensitive: XML names are case-sensitive. For example, `<Tag>` and `<tag>` are considered different tags.
1. Avoid XML reserved words: Names should not match XML reserved words like xml, XML, Xml, etc.

### Characters Not Allowed in Names
Names cannot start with a number or punctuation character.
Names cannot contain spaces.
Names cannot contain the following characters: !, @, #, $, %, ^, &, *, (, ), +, =, {, }, [, ], |, \, :, ;, ", ', <, >, ,, ?, /.

### Examples

#### valid names
```xml
<tagName>content</tagName>
<_tagName>content</_tagName>
<tag-name>content</tag-name>
<tag.name>content</tag.name>
<tag123>content</tag123>
```

#### invalid names
```xml
<123tag>content</123tag> <!-- Starts with a number -->
<tag name>content</tag name> <!-- Contains a space -->
<tag!name>content</tag!name> <!-- Contains an exclamation mark -->
```